
Endgame moves are generated just like any other move by GNU
Go. In fact, the concept of endgame does not exist
explicitly, but we can consider the endgame to be reached
when the move values generally have decreased to about 20
and the endgame patterns come into play. This is typically
fairly late, when most of the remaining plays are worth a
few points in gote.

It should be noted that GNU Go currently makes no attempt
whatsoever to play a theoretically perfect endgame. Instead
the goal is just to play a decent, although maybe somewhat
passive, endgame. What this means is primarily to play the
small endgame moves in roughly the right order.

The endgame is implemented by a number of patterns in
@file{patterns.db}, classified as EE, edge endgame, or CE, center
endgame. In order to play the endgame moves in the right
order, the patterns should be valued according to a
pessimistic estimation of the size of the move. If the move
is gote or reverse sente, it should have a value given by
the table below.

@format

Value   Size
1       Fill dame, i.e. 0 points gote.
2       Fill or take an unimportant ko, 1/2 point gote.
3       1 point gote.
4       1 1/2 point gote, typically two stage unimportant ko
        or 1 point gote with a followup of one more point
        gote. 
5       2 points gote or 1 point reverse sente.
7       3 points gote.
10      4 points gote or 2 points reverse sente.
15      About 6 points gote or 3 points reverse sente.
20      At least 8 points gote or at least 4 points reverse
        sente. 

@end format

Small sente moves should be valued at least 5, with the exact
value depending on the size of the followup move. Most sente
moves are not considered as endgame moves by GNU Go, neither
are larger gote or reverse sente moves. A minimal double
sente move should at least have value 10, but in most cases
they should be played before the endgame.


@section Example

@example
@group
Pattern CE6

X?        push in
*O

:8,1,0,0,0,0,OX,0,NULL
@end group
@end example

A move generated from this pattern may be worth one or more
points, e.g. in the position

@example
@group
XXXO
..*O
XXXO
@end group
@end example

where it is required that all stones are alive and it is
assumed that the empty points would be territory for X with
a stone at *. It could, however, also be applied in a
position like

@example
@group
XXXO
.X*O
XXXO
@end group
@end example

where it only fills a dame. Hence the value of the pattern
is no more than 1. To get a larger value for a move in the
position above, we need to have a more specific pattern that
is guaranteed to be worth at least one point gote, e.g.

@example
@group
Pattern CE6b

X?        push in
*O        1 points gote

:8,3,0,OX,0,0,0,0,0,NULL

X?
aO

;marginal_eye(a)
@end group
@end example

By taking help of the eye space evaluation we can know for certain
that this move is worth at least one point.
